Add CrUX History API documentation (#5087)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/crux/history-api/index.md

> ---

Reviewer: question: Also, from what I understand, this is relatively similar functionality to current CrUX API so maybe it would be more beneficial to keep it short and up to the point on how does it correlate with the current CrUX API?

Please, keep in mind that I might be missing some parts here. If so, I will try to correct myself :)

Author: You're totally right. I struggled between the different options of:
- Adding to that existing api doc
- Keeping this very short
- Copying that doc and ruthlessly cutting as much as I could out of it, but still leaving it long enough to sit as a semi-standalone reference doc.

I went with the third option, but would value your opinion on better ways to do this!

Reviewer: I am a huge fan of short and up-to-the-point documentation or articles. 

If this new History API is quite similar to the existing API, I would focus in this document on explaining the core/major differences and for everything that is common, just add a link to the existing API documentation so that it would be easier for the new users to start this out.

So preferably option 2 ;)

1. What is the new History API
2. Use Cases
3. Major differences between History API and existing API
4. Links to the existing API docs

This is probably how I would have done that :)

Author: That sounds more like the blog post we're working on! As I say I'd like to keep the "docs" more a reference. Let's pick this up again after I'd added the blog post to this PR and see what you think.

Reviewer: Sounds great. Let me know once it is added and I will take a look at it :)

Author: @Baroshem the blog post has been added to this PR if you get a chance to look:
https://deploy-preview-5087--developer-chrome-com.netlify.app/blog/chrome-ux-report-history-api/

Hoping to release this later today.

# Required
layout: 'layouts/doc-post.njk'

# Required
title: CrUX History API

# Required
# This appears in the ToC of the project landing page at
# /docs/[project-name]/. It also appears in the <meta description> used in
# Google Search.
description: >

>   Learn how to construct requests to and parse responses from the CrUX History API.

Reviewer 2: Emphasizing the value prop of this API

```suggestion
  Learn how to query the previous six months of historical CrUX trends using the CrUX History API.
```

# Optional
# This appears below the title and is an optional teaser
subhead: >

>   The CrUX History API gives low-latency access to aggregated real-user experience data at page and origin granularity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The CrUX History API gives low-latency access to six months of historical real-user experience data at page and origin granularity.
```

# Required
date: 2023-02-07

# Optional
# Include an updated date when you update your post
# updated: 2023-02-07

# Optional
# How to add a new author
# https://developer.chrome.com/docs/handbook/how-to/add-an-author/
# authors:

# Optional
# How to a new tag
# https://developer.chrome.com/docs/handbook/how-to/add-a-tag/
tags:
  - web-vitals
  - crux
---

## Common use case

> The CrUX History API allows for the querying of a historty user experience metrics for a specific URI like "Get the history of time series metrics for the `https://example.com` origin."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CrUX History API allows for the querying of historical user experience metrics for a specific URI like "Get the historical UX trends for the `https://example.com` origin."
```

Like the daily API, using the CrUX History API requires a Google Cloud API key. The same key can be used for the daily and history API.

You can create one in the [Credentials](https://console.developers.google.com/apis/credentials) page and provision it for `Chrome UX Report API` usage.

After you have an API key, your application can append the query parameter `key=[YOUR_API_KEY]` to all request URLs. See the [Example queries](#example-queries) below.

The API key is safe for embedding in URLs; it doesn't need any encoding.

## Data model

This section details the structure of data in requests and responses.

### Record

A discrete piece of information about a page, or site. A record can have data that is specific for an identifier and for a specific combination of dimensions. A record can contain data for one or more metrics.

### Identifiers

Identifiers specify what records should be looked up. In CrUX these identifiers are webpages and websites.

### Origin

When the identifier is an origin all data present for all pages in that origin are aggregated together. For example, say the `http://www.example.com` origin had pages as laid out by this sitemap:

```text

> http://www.example.com

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
http://www.example.com/
```

http://www.example.com/foo.html
http://www.example.com/bar.html
```

This would mean that when querying the Chrome UX Report with the origin set to `http://www.example.com`, data for `http://www.example.com/`, `http://www.example.com/foo.html`, and `http://www.example.com/bar.html` would be returned, aggregated together, because those are all pages under that origin.

### URLs

When the identifier is a URL, only data for that specific URL will be returned. Looking again to the `http://www.example.com` origin sitemap:

```text

> http://www.example.com

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
http://www.example.com/
```

http://www.example.com/foo.html
http://www.example.com/bar.html
```

If the identifier is set to URL with the value of `http://www.example.com/foo.html`, only data for that page will be returned.

### Dimensions

Dimensions identify a specific group of data that a record is being aggregated against. For example, a form factor of `PHONE` indicates that the record contains information about loads that took place on a mobile device.

The CrUX History API is only available aggregated by form factor dimension. This is a general class of device split into `PHONE`, `TABLET`, and `DESKTOP`.

{% Aside %}
Unlike the daily API, the CrUX History API does not have data aggregated against Effective Connection Type (ECT).

> {% endAside %}

Reviewer 2: These two paragraphs are saying the same thing. Can they be combined?

Author: Yes it's kind of implied in first paragraph as _only_ form factor is available, but I felt it important to explicitly highlight that ECT was not available as it is a difference from the daily API. You don't think this is necessary?

### Metric

Metrics are expressed in a histogram array, which represents the percent of users that experienced a metric with that value proportionally to all.

A simple three bin histogram for an example metric looks like this:

```json
{
  "histogramTimeseries": [
    {
      "start": 0,
      "end": 2500,
      "densities": [0.9190, 0.9203, 0.9194, 0.9195, 0.9183, 0.9187]
    },
    {
      "start": 2500,
      "end": 4000,
      "densities": [0.0521, 0.0513, 0.0518, 0.0518, 0.0526, 0.0527]
    },
    {
      "start": 4000,
      "densities": [0.0288, 0.0282, 0.0286, 0.0285, 0.0290, 0.0285]
    }
  ],
}
```

> This data indicates that 91.2% of users experience the example metric value between 0ms and 2,500ms for the first collection period in the history, followed by 92.0%, 91.9%, and so on. The units of the metric are not contained in this histogram, in this case we will assume milliseconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This data indicates that 91.90% of users experience the example metric value between 0ms and 2,500ms for the first collection period in the history, followed by 92.03%, 91.94%, and so on. The units of the metric are not contained in this histogram, in this case we will assume milliseconds.
```

> This data indicates that 91.2% of users experience the example metric value between 0ms and 2,500ms for the first collection period in the history, followed by 92.0%, 91.9%, and so on. The units of the metric are not contained in this histogram, in this case we will assume milliseconds.

Reviewer 2: Worth clarifying that "first collection period in the history" corresponds to the earliest period (index 0) in the `collectionPeriods` array.

> Additionally, 5.2% of users experience the example metric value between 2,500ms and 4,000ms in the first collection period in the history, and 2.8% of users experience a value greater than 4,000ms in the first collection period in the history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, 5.21% of users experience the example metric value between 2,500ms and 4,000ms in the first collection period in the history, and 2.88% of users experience a value greater than 4,000ms in the first collection period in the history.
```

{% Aside %}
Note: The values for each percentile are synthetically derived, it does not imply that any user actually experienced the value indicated, only that some percentage of users experienced a metric value that was less than the value given.
{% endAside %}

#### Metric value types

As the CrUX History API uses the same metric value types, you can reference [the daily CrUX API metric value types documentation](../api/#metric-value-types) for more details.

#### Metric eligibility

Based on the [eligibility criteria](../methodology/#eligibility) an origin or URL may only be eligible for some of the collection periods covered by the CrUX History API. In these cases the CrUX History API will return `"NaN"` for the `histogramTimeseries` densities and `null` for the `percentilesTimeseries` for the collection periods which have no eligible data. For example, if the second period did not have any eligible data, this would show as:

```json
{
  "histogramTimeseries": [
    {
      "start": 0,
      "end": 2500,

>       "densities": [0.9190, "NaN", 0.9194, 0.9195, 0.9183, 0.9187]

Reviewer 2: Unclear why this is `"NaN"` unlike the `null` values in `percentilesTimeseries`. (we can discuss in the team chat)

    },
    {
      "start": 2500,
      "end": 4000,
      "densities": [0.0521, "NaN", 0.0518, 0.0518, 0.0526, 0.0527]
    },
    {
      "start": 4000,
      "densities": [0.0288, "NaN", 0.0286, 0.0285, 0.0290, 0.0285]
    }
  ],
  "percentilesTimeseries": {
    "p75s": [1362, null, 1344, 1356, 1366, 1377]
  },
}
```

> ### Collection Periods

Reviewer 2: Title case for headings
```suggestion
### Collection periods
```

```

{% Aside 'note' %}
The above example is for MacOS or Linux based systems—including the Git BASH shell for Windows. Other systems may require slight modifications. For example, the `cmd.exe` command line does not allow single quotes for parameters, nor the line continuations (`\`), so requires using double quotes (escaping inner quotes as appropriate with `\"`), and also using a single line.
{% endAside %}

Page-level data is available through the API by passing a `url` property in the query, instead of `origin`:

```json
{
  "url": "https://example.com/page",
  "formFactor": "PHONE",
  "metrics": [
    "largest_contentful_paint",
    "experimental_time_to_first_byte"
  ]
}
```

If the `metrics` property is not set then all available metrics will be returned:

- `largest_contentful_paint`
- `cumulative_layout_shift`
- `experimental_interaction_to_next_paint`
- `experimental_time_to_first_byte`
- `first_contentful_paint`
- `first_input_delay`

If no `formFactor` value is provided then the values will be aggregated across all form factors.

> See [History web performance data via the CrUX API](https://TODO) for more example queries.

Reviewer 2: Reminder to resolve the TODO

## Data pipeline

The CrUX dataset is processed through a pipeline to consolidate, aggregate and filter the data before becoming available via the API.

### The rolling average

The data in the Chrome UX Report is a 28-day rolling average of aggregated metrics. This means that the data presented in the Chrome UX Report at any given time is actually data for the past 28 days aggregated together.

> The History API contains a number of collection periods, each spanning these 28 days. As each collection period contains the previous 28-days aggregated data, and the collection periods are per week, this means the collection periods will overlap. They are similar to a moving average of data, with three weeks worth of data being included in each subsequent period, and one week being different.

Reviewer 2: This appears to duplicate content in the Collection Periods section

### Weekly updates

The History API is updated each Monday around 04:00 UTC and contains data up until the previous Saturday (as per the standard 2-day lag). It contains the previous 25 weeks (approximately 6 months) worth of data, one collection period per week.

There is no service level agreement for update times; it is run on a best-effort basis every day.

{% Aside 'caution' %}
Data will not differ within the same week after it has been updated each Monday around 04:00 UTC, repeated calls will yield the same results.
{% endAside %}

## Schema

There is a single endpoint for the CrUX History API which accepts `POST` HTTP requests. The API returns a `record` which contains one or more `metrics` corresponding to performance data about the requested origin or page.

### HTTP request

```http
POST https://chromeuxreport.googleapis.com/v1/records:queryHistoryRecord
```

The URL uses [gRPC Transcoding](https://google.aip.dev/127) syntax.

### Request body

As the CrUX History API uses the same request bodies, you can reference [the daily CrUX API request body documentation](../api/#request-body) for more details.

> For example, to request the desktop largest contentful paint values for the Chrome developer documentation homepage:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, to request the desktop Largest Contentful Paint values for the web.dev homepage:
```
